JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill is away.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: At least one person is
dead and more than
100 injured after a New Jersey
commuter train crashes into the
Hoboken station.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Thursday: how the
candidates are taking advantage
of
early voting, with up to a third
of Americans casting their
ballot before November 8.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a report from
Afghanistan on the fight for
women's rights, despite
injustices
embed in the society even
before there was a war.
KIM MOTLEY, Attorney: A lot of
people don't realize that
Afghanistan is a country where
it's been reported that over 85
percent of the women are victims
of domestic violence.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Plus: Making
Sense of Donald Trump's taxes,
what voters should know, and
how the U.S. tax system
often favors the wealthy.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON, Author, "The
Making of Donald Trump": For
certain very wealthy people,
our federal income tax system is
a subsidy system that makes them
richer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Investigators
in Northern New Jersey have a
big question to ponder tonight:
Why did a commuter train smash
into a station in the midst of
rush hour?
For now, the answer is
anything but clear.
It was 8:45 this morning, when a
New Jersey transit train came
barreling into Hoboken
without slowing down.
A passenger in the first car
said there'd been no hint of
anything wrong.
WOMAN: There wasn't even a
screeching, like it was halting.
It just kept going.
Maybe there was some kind of,
like, braking involved, because
the lights went off and
people started screaming.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The speeding
railcars crashed through a
barrier and into the outer wall
of the terminal waiting room,
crushing the front of the train
and collapsing part of
the ceiling.
MAN: We have a train that's into
the train station at Hoboken
terminal.
We are going to need multiple
EMS for multiple injuries.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Police and
emergency workers rushed to the
station, a commuter hub just
outside New York that handles
50,000 passengers every day.
Bystanders jumped in to help
people pinned under mangled
steel and concrete.
MAN: The second half of the
first car was completely
destroyed, to where they were
crawling
on their hands and knees.
And we were trying to
get as many people out.
I assisted in maybe three
or four people getting out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The lone
fatality was a woman on the
platform killed by the falling
debris.
WILLIAM BLAINE, Witness: They
were pulling people out.
People were jumping out, cuts
and bruises, and -- but I didn't
realize, when I ran, I
stepped over a body.
It was a dead woman.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dozens
were sent to area hospitals.
Three were in critical
condition, including the train's
conductor.
Many more made it out
with minor injuries.
Hours later, New Jersey Governor
Chris Christie and New York
Governor Andrew Cuomo toured
the scene.
Christie said it appeared to be
an accident, but key questions
remain.
GOV.
CHRIS CHRISTIE (R), New Jersey:
What we know is that the train
came in at much too high
a rate of speed, and the
question is, why is that?
HARI SREENIVASAN: The National
Transportation Safety Board has
now opened an investigation.
And New Jersey transit's
terminal at Hoboken is closed.
Other parts of the
station have reopened.
A short time ago, officials
announced that the train's
engineer has been released from
the hospital, and they plan
to interview him soon.
We're joined now by Brenda
Flanagan of NJTV News, part of
our public broadcasting family.
Brenda, you have been
there reporting all day.
What is the scene like now?
BRENDA FLANAGAN, NJTV News:
Well, right now, you can see
that the building is still
surrounded
by police vehicles
and command centers.
The National Transportation
Safety Board just held a
briefing in which they told us
that
the train was equipped with
outward-facing cameras.
Obviously, they're going to
be looking at those tapes.
They're also going to be
pulling the black box tonight.
As the train station remains
closed, they will be looking for
issues like operator error,
mechanical issues, signal
problems, track issues.
Now, they will not determine the
cause of this accident today or
on the scene.
It's going to take seven to 10
days before they're able to come
up with possibly a reason
for this catastrophe -- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Brenda, it's
almost surprising that it's as
few people were injured,
considering
what a busy transit hub this is
in the New York area and that it
happened during rush
hour, when trains
are usually packed.
BRENDA FLANAGAN: Absolutely.
This was -- I know it's a
cliche, but it's like the
perfect storm, when you had so
many
wrong things.
You had all of these
people jampacked.
It was a standing-room-only type
of commuter train coming in at
8:45 in the morning, everybody
heading into downtown Manhattan,
to the ferries, to the PATH.
The fact that only one person
was killed in this accident is
amazing.
The Transportation Safety Board
is going to be looking at this
tonight, but positive train
control is another
issue that was raised.
Governor Christie was asked
whether or not that might have
slowed the train down.
New Jersey Transit has no
positive train control apparatus
on any of its tracks or
facilities.
Now, Senators Menendez and
Booker of New Jersey held a news
conference this afternoon.
They said they are alarmed about
the lack of security and the
lack of safety and that
they are going to be looking
into this seriously, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tell us also a
little about all the civilians
that actually responded
because of the structural
threat right after the crash.
BRENDA FLANAGAN:
That was amazing.
In this area, you know, we
always have in the back of our
minds, because of 9/11, this
could be a terror attack.
And, as you well know, New
Jersey and New York has been the
scene of bombings that have
been linked to a possible terror
threat just a week-and-a-half
ago.
Now, be that as it may, people
who are in the terminal when
there was this huge boom,
they said the building shook,
the lights flickered, and
several people ran toward the
source of
the boom.
They got to the scene, they
helped remove some of the
passengers from the area.
Looking up, seeing that that
ceiling just might collapse,
they said, it's too dangerous,
we have to help move these
people out of the way.
One man actually took the shirt
off his back to fold it around
some of the victims.
He said they were shaking
because they were cold and
scared and in pain.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Brenda Flanagan joining us from
the scene in Hoboken from
NJTV News, thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Republican leaders
in both houses of Congress
opened
the door to changes in a new law
allowing relatives of the 9/11
victims to sue the government
of Saudi Arabia, this just one
day after lawmakers pushed the
measure through to passage, and,
in so doing, managed the first
override of a veto by President
Obama.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell faulted the White
House for being too slow to
point
out problems.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: I think it was an
example of an issue we should
have on a bipartisan basis
talked about much earlier,
because everybody was aware of
who
the potential beneficiaries
were, but nobody really had
focused on the potential
downside
in terms of our international
relationships.
And I think it was
just a ball dropped.
JUDY WOODRUFF: House Speaker
Paul Ryan also suggested a fix
might be needed.
And White House spokesman Josh
Earnest took note of the shift.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: I think what we have
seen in the United States
Congress is a pretty classic
case of rapid-onset buyer's
remorse.
If there are members of Congress
that have had a change of heart,
are now prepared to
take a principled position, we
would welcome a conversation
about that.
We would welcome action to solve
the problem that they have
created.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
has warned that the new law
could lead to retaliation
against Americans abroad.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The United
States is on the verge of ending
its Syrian talks with
Russia because of the assault on
Aleppo that from Secretary of
State John Kerry today.
At a Washington event, he said
diplomacy can't continue in the
face of an all-out Russian-
Syrian offensive.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: It's irrational in the
context of the kind of bombing
taking place to be sitting there
trying to take things seriously.
There's no notion or indication
of a seriousness of purpose with
what is taking place right
now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Earlier,
Russia brushed aside
Washington's warnings.
But the defense minister
suggested a possible 48-hour
truce to let humanitarian aid
into
Aleppo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: American Olympic
and Paralympic athletes had
their White House moment today.
The president hailed their
success at this summer's Games
in Rio de Janeiro, winning
46 Olympic gold medals
and 40 Paralympic golds.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: It inspires us to
do what we do much harder.
We admire your athleticism but
we also admire your character
and your stick-to-itiveness.
We know you don't do this
for the money or the fame.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Obama also
hosted families of
African-American Olympians from
the 1936
Games.
Those athletes were left out of
a White House welcome 80 years
ago.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stocks fells
sharply on Wall Street today, as
drug companies and banks
suffered major losses.
The Dow Jones industrial average
plunged nearly 196 points to
close at 18143.
The Nasdaq fell 49 points,
and the S&P 500 lost 20.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Congress
hopes to help parents who need
to change babies' diapers
in federal buildings.
A bill sent to the president
today requires changing stations
be installed in men's and
women's restrooms in all federal
sites open to the public.
That includes courthouses, post
offices and some government-run
museums.
It's about time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It is.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the candidates start their sweep
through swing states as
early voting gets under way; the
changing lives of Afghan women
after 15 years of war;
Making Sense of Donald Trump's
taxes; and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Election Day may
be 40 days away, but voting has
already started in a
number of states.
Lisa Desjardins reports on
the candidates ground game.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: I am so
happy to be back here in Iowa
LISA DESJARDINS: Just hours
after Iowa started early voting,
Hillary Clinton was in Des
Moines
with a turnout push.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Are
you ready to go to the polls?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well,
luckily in Iowa, you can start
today.
LISA DESJARDINS: Performance
from the state's high-profile
caucuses back in February, when
she barely eked out a win
over Bernie Sanders.
She's now neck and neck
with Donald Trump in Iowa.
The Democratic nominee is also
visiting another state kicking
off early voting today,
Illinois,
to host two fund-raisers
in Chicago.
Meanwhile, Donald Trump returned
to the site of his first 2016
win, New Hampshire.
He cleaned up in the state's
primary, but it's a general
election tossup.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: They said the biggest
single problem they
have up here is heroin.
If I win, I get the nomination,
and I win, we're going to build
that wall, and we're
going to stop that
heroin from pouring in.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Away from the
campaign trail, the Republican's
business investments took
the spotlight.
"Newsweek" reported that Trump's
hotel and casino business spent
$68,000 in Cuba in the
late 1990s, routing it through a
third party, to try and gain a
business foothold there.
That apparently violated strict
U.S. bans on doing any business
with the communist nation.
Trump's campaign manager,
Kellyanne Conway, defended him
on "The View," but she seemed
to admit there was
business conducted.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Campaign
Manager: And it turns out that
he didn't -- he decided
not to invest there.
(CROSSTALK)
QUESTION: So, are you denying
they said that -- that his
company spent any money in Cuba?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: I think they
paid money -- as I understand
from the story, they paid
money in 1998.
We're not supposed to talk about
years ago when it comes to the
Clintons.
LISA DESJARDINS: Later,
Clinton weighed in.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Donald
Trump knew what the law was.
And from everything we can tell
by the investigative reporting
that has been done, he
deliberately
flouted it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Another set of
headlines today for Libertarian
Gary Johnson.
One big win: He earned the
endorsement of The Detroit News,
which called Trump unstable
and possibly dangerous.
It was the first time in the
paper's 143-year history that it
hasn't endorsed a Republican.
But Johnson also faced some bad
press, after he was asked on
MSNBC last night to name a
foreign leader he respects:
GARY JOHNSON, Libertarian
Presidential Candidate: I guess
I'm having an Aleppo moment, and
the
former president of Mexico...
CHRIS MATTHEWS, MSNBC: But I'm
giving you the whole world.
GARY JOHNSON: I know, I
know, I know, I know.
CHRIS MATTHEWS: Anybody in
the world you like, anybody.
Pick any leader.
GARY JOHNSON: The former
president of Mexico.
CHRIS MATTHEWS: No.
Which one?
GARY JOHNSON: I'm having a
brain -- I'm having a brain...
CHRIS MATTHEWS:
Well, name anybody.
(CROSSTALK)
BILL WELD, Libertarian Vice
Presidential Candidate: Fox.
LISA DESJARDINS: Johnson is
polling at 7 percent nationwide,
much higher in a few states, but
it's not enough yet to make the
stage for the second
presidential debate in two
weeks.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All told, more
than a third of all votes are
expected to be cast early
this year.
And that math has changed
the way campaigns organize.
Reporter Sasha Issenberg with
Bloomberg News has been digging
in on the role of early voting
in this election, and
he joins me now.
Sasha Issenberg, welcome.
So, this is really changing the
way the campaign -- the
candidates and the campaigns are
organized.
SASHA ISSENBERG, Bloomberg
Politics: Yes, you know, within
Hillary Clinton's campaign
-- we saw her today.
She went to Iowa to try to
basically start get-out-the-vote
activities five weeks before
Election Day.
But within her headquarters in
Brooklyn, they have basically
changed the internal org chart.
In past years, campaigns have
split up the country by
geography.
They put all the Western states
in one group, and they put all
the Southern states in one
group.
This year, she set up her pods,
as they call them, separating
out the early vote states.
And that's because the sort of
rhythm and strategy and tactics
they use there is now
so different.
Some of these states, it's --
you know, well over 50 percent
of votes are going to be cast
before Election Day.
And that changes who you're
talking to and when.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is there much
more of that going on this year,
Sasha, than it was in
2012?
SASHA ISSENBERG: Yes, we
see steady increases.
Obviously, we won't know until
after Election Day what
percentage of the vote is early,
but this tends to go
in one direction.
You know, as people vote early,
they develop a habit, much as
they do with regular voting.
And so early voters
tend to vote early.
And a lot of states, although
obviously not all, have taken
strides to make it easier,
so that people who can request
absentee ballots don't need
excuses to do it.
Some states like Ohio are now
automatically sending out
absentee ballots to most voters.
So, you know, in a lot of
places, voters are being pushed
into this, and so it could be
as high as 40 percent this year
of the total electorate that
votes before Election Day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
about the difference in how
these two campaigns are
positioned to take
advantage of this.
You just mentioned that Clinton
has reorganized the way the
whole campaign is organized.
How about Donald Trump?
SASHA ISSENBERG: Yes, Trump's
campaign has been pretty public
about the fact that they're
leaving all sorts of field
activities, get-out-the-vote
stuff, to the Republican
National Committee
and to state parties.
And this is a place where they
may have different interests.
You may have in, let's say Iowa,
where Chuck Grassley is running,
the senator, is running
for reelection, you could have
voters who decided early that
they are on board with
Grassley, but are still
undecided in the presidential
race, or are considering a
third-party candidate.
And if Trump is relying on the
state party to turn those voters
out, he could find that,
you know, people aren't
necessarily voting a straight
ticket when they get that
reminder
phone call to return
their ballot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're saying
really the targeted voters for
the national candidates
might be different from those
of the state candidates.
But what about the
Clinton campaign?
Have they now perfected this?
How would you describe
how far along they are?
SASHA ISSENBERG: You know, I
think that there's been a lot of
focus on this, as there was
in 2012 from the Obama campaign,
among Democrats, who see it as
an opportunity, especially in
larger, more diverse states like
North Carolina, Florida, that
have early voting, to use the
extended period to mobilize some
of the communities that are very
important to the Democratic
coalition, especially
minorities, who are often
difficult to turn out
And so, you know, we see North
Carolina as a very good example
of where Democrats have
worked hard to move up the
African-American vote, taking
advantage of the multiweek early
vote window.
So, those people are voting
in often mid-October.
And as the campaign gets later,
Hillary Clinton will be more
likely there to speaking to sort
of persuadable moderate white
voters, because she will feel
that she's locked in many of
the votes from her base.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what are a
couple of other swing states in
this election that -- where
early voting, you see,
could make a difference?
SASHA ISSENBERG: Nevada is a
state that's majority early vote
now.
They make it very easy
to vote in Nevada.
There are registration forms
in supermarkets there.
They have weekend early voting.
You can vote on Saturdays
in late October.
And then Colorado is sort of
the, you know, extreme case of a
battleground state.
There is no in-person
Election Day voting.
Everybody gets a mail ballot.
You can drop it off until, I
believe, 7:00 p.m. on Election
Day.
But Election Day itself
is an afterthought.
It's just one more day that you
can drop off your absentee
ballot or put it in the mail.
And so, by the time we get to
Election Day in Colorado, most
of the votes will be banked.
And the campaigns will probably
wake up on Election Day and
think they know who's won.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Huh.
Well, it certainly is -- we paid
attention to it in 2012, but it
sounds like it is much
more of a factor this year.
Sasha Issenberg with Bloomberg
News, we thank you.
SASHA ISSENBERG:
Thank you, Judy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fifteen since
the United States went into
Afghanistan, the U.S. has
spent an estimated $1.5 billion
to develop women's rights in the
country.
There's also a new $300 million
five-year program to continue to
help women have a say
in their society.
But, despite the money, the fact
that only a quarter of
parliamentarians are now women,
and laws protecting them from
violence, Afghan women still
face significant challenges.
Special correspondent Jennifer
Glasse reports from Kabul.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Kobra
Dastgirzada is a successful
Afghan businesswoman.
The U.S.-funded program Promote
has sent these women to learn
from her.
She's sharing more than a
decade's experience running
companies in Afghanistan.
Helped in part with U.S. funds
over the years, her enterprises
include making jams, pickles,
baskets and dried soup packs.
She remembers life under the
Taliban, and says things have
improved since 2001.
KOBRA DASTGIRZADA, Entrepreneur:
In this 15 period, or years, it
was a very good chance
for women, because there
was a good program.
And every day, the new program
come, especially about the
business, about the society,
about
education.
Everything did come.
And the women get a lot of
benefits from this program too.
Right now, the women has a
good state to the society.
JENNIFER GLASSE: But even with
experience, it's not easy.
She can't manufacture on this
day because there's no
electricity, and this is Kabul.
She knows life is much harder in
business and other ways for
women elsewhere in Afghanistan.
KOBRA DASTGIRZADA: Right now, in
the province, it is a very big
problem, because the women
cannot go out of the home,
because the Taliban has the
control.
You know that.
Then maybe they kill them.
And maybe, one day, they kill me
too, because I work and have a
lot of activity.
If they come and get Kabul,
the first person will be I.
They kill me.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Kobra says she
can't worry about the Taliban's
recent military gains
around the country.
She wants to concentrate
on her work.
Kobra has advantages many other
Afghan women don't, not just a
supportive husband, but
her factory is in her backyard,
so she can work at home.
And her shop is just
in front of her house.
Her small shop is just one
outlet for her goods.
She also sends them to markets.
For that, she needs a man.
Afghan society would frown on
women selling in the bazaar.
That man makes three times the
salary of her female Afghan
employees.
Kobra says that can't be helped.
She needs him.
Even where women succeed, the
culture of discrimination here
finds its place.
KIM MOTLEY, Attorney: A lot of
people don't realize that
Afghanistan is a country where
it's been reported that over 85
percent of the women are victims
of domestic violence.
It's a country where I
understand that 72 percent of
women are uneducated.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Kim Motley is a
lawyer who takes on some of
Afghanistan's most desperate
cases, like Sahar Gul, who was
tortured and abused by her
husband's family.
She testified against them and
they were jailed, a rare victory
here.
Motley's newest client is Gul
Meena, attacked with an axe by
her brother, uncle and husband
and left for dead.
KIM MOTLEY: This incident
happened over three years ago.
And it is deplorable that not
one person in the Afghan
government has bothered to talk
to her about what happened.
I mean, literally, there are
three axe murderers on the loose
in Afghanistan or Pakistan.
They don't know, but no one has
bothered to sort of find out.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Gul Meena says
she is still afraid of her
attackers, but would like to
see them punished and would
be willing to testify.
GUL MEENA, Victim of Axe Attack
(through translator): I'm
worried that, if I go to court,
then the
judge might put me in
jail because I ran away.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Hundreds of
women have been jailed for
so-called moral crimes, like
leaving
their husbands or even
being alone with a man.
President Ghani released many.
Regardless of their cases, both
Gul Meena and Sahar Gul want to
leave Afghanistan.
They feel there's no
future here for them.
Susan DeCamp is one of the
stewards of the five-year, $300
million U.S.-funded Promote
program for women.
She says she knows women's
rights are tenuous here.
SUSAN DECAMP, USAID: It's a
challenge, and it's always been
a challenge, and it's going
to continue to be a challenge
for quite a while.
What we hope to do is get enough
women out there working together
in a positive way,
so that they can have
their own voice.
It's not so much about us
deciding what they want and
need, but about them being in a
position
to influence what they
want and what they need.
JENNIFER GLASSE: On a farm on
the outskirts of Kabul, that's
what Sophia Wilcox is doing
teaching, women to
stand on their own.
She's taken a somewhat
tough-love approach with her
farming training programs.
Anyone who wants to participate
has to pay dues to be part of
the collective.
Since she arrived in 2009,
Wilcox has avoided creating what
she calls NGO disease,
dependency
on international aid.
SOPHIA WILCOX, Women in
Agriculture: I don't give them
anything because we need to
teach
them to be independent and use
what they have, become creative
in their use of their own
resources to build
themselves up.
JENNIFER GLASSE:
And it's working.
One of the gardeners has a
daughter who's a hospital
worker, so they devised these
drip
feeding systems.
Women are motivated,
with good reason.
SOPHIA WILCOX: There's decisions
that they're not allowed to
make.
And if they're given a slight
bit of income, they can make
those decisions, children going
to school, whether or not they
go to school, if we buy
medicine, if we don't buy
medicine.
Those types of decisions are
not given to women freely.
And when they have their own
income, they are able to make
those decisions.
JENNIFER GLASSE: The Afghan
women started managing this farm
on their own last October.
So far, each of the 15 workers
has made about $100 a month.
Considering a taxi driver in
Kabul makes about $150 a month,
it's good money, more than they
have ever made in their lives.
A lump sum is expected at the
end of the summer harvest.
Next year, they
expect to earn more.
Farm manager Lailajan Yousafzai
needs no help with marketing.
She knows her
products inside out.
She's proud to support the 15
women farmers here, and to give
some income to 25 more.
They can't leave their homes, so
they grow products in their own
gardens.
LAILAJAN YOUSAFZAI, Farm Manager
(through translator): One woman
sent her son to university.
She can pay for his transport
and she can pay for his books.
We all use the money
for our families.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Four years ago,
this was all dirt and weeds.
But as often happens here,
success brings problems.
Although this project paid for
the local water pump and its
repair, the man who has the key
demands money to supply water.
For Sophia, it's a dilemma.
SOPHIA WILCOX: It's a problem
for me, because I'm working for
essentially the U.S. taxpayer,
and we can't pay bribes, and --
but bribes are really common.
And so it's a frustration,
and it's everywhere.
It's rampant.
You can't get anything
done, really.
JENNIFER GLASSE: A rival project
nearby, funded by the Afghan
government, is failing.
Its politically connected
manager is threatening to take
the women's land away.
The women here say they will
fight that to stay, that the
money they're making is changing
their lives.
But like so many things here, as
women, they ultimately may not
have a choice.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jennifer Glasse in Kabul.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now what we know
about Donald Trump's taxes, what
we don't know, and how
his real estate business could
be affecting his tax bill.
That subject led to one of the
more memorable exchanges of this
week's presidential debate.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, sat down with a
Pulitzer-Prize winning
investigative
journalist, David Cay Johnston,
who's been reporting on Trump
since the late '80s.
He's also the author of a
bestselling book, "The Making of
Donald Trump."
It's part of our weekly
series Making Sense.
PAUL SOLMAN: David Cay
Johnston, welcome.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON, Author, "The
Making of Donald Trump": Thank
you, Paul.
PAUL SOLMAN: Let's begin with
Secretary Clinton's claim that
Mr. Trump pays no federal income
taxes, and, in the
debate, his response.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: Maybe he
doesn't want the American
people,
all of you watching tonight, to
know that he's paid nothing in
federal taxes, because
the only years that anybody's
ever seen were a couple of years
when he had to turn them
over to state authorities when
he was trying to get a casino
license, and they showed he
didn't pay any
federal income tax.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: That makes me smart.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON:
So, if he's paid...
PAUL SOLMAN: The media are
making a big fuss about that
offhand remark of Mr. Trump's,
but isn't he right to say
he's smart to pay no taxes?
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: Well, there
are two issues here to separate.
And one of them is, because he
is a -- the owner of a lot of
real estate that he manages,
he may well pay no income taxes.
We know for a fact that he
didn't pay any income taxes in
1978, 1979, 1984, 1992 and
1994.
We know because of the reports
of the New Jersey Casino Control
Commission.
We don't know about
any year after that.
PAUL SOLMAN: But that's because
he's depreciating the
properties, right, while, in
fact, they're
increasing in value.
But I depreciate the
home office in my house.
I work there.
I don't have another office.
It's just not much of a
benefit for me, obviously.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: Most
Americans cannot save more than
$6,000 a year from depreciating
real estate.
That's all they can write off
against their salary or business
profits.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, I don't
come close to $6,000.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: But people
like Trump can take all the
money that's made from a
TV show, from selling neckties
made in China, running golf
courses, and wipe out that
income
for tax purposes
with depreciation.
Only a narrow segment of
people qualify for this.
PAUL SOLMAN: And how
does he qualify?
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: Because he
spends at least 15 hours a week
managing real estate that
he owns.
That's the rule.
If you're a full-time manager of
your own property -- and
full-time, according to
Congress,
is 15 hours a week -- you can
take unlimited depreciation and
use it to offset your income
from other areas and
pay little in tax.
Years ago, one of the biggest
real estate tax lawyers in New
York said to me, if you're
a major real estate family and
you're paying income taxes, you
should sue your tax lawyer
for malpractice.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, but then he's
just doing what everybody else
does.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON:
That's right.
Congress has all sorts of rules,
Paul, that certain people, hedge
fund managers, private
equity managers, executives,
movie stars, fall into that
allow them to escape or defer
into the future not
paying their taxes.
And if you can defer your tax
into the future, it's the best
deal in the world, because you
don't just get to eat your
cake and have it too.
You get to eat your cake
and have a bigger cake.
PAUL SOLMAN: But you mean you
get to keep the money...
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: Right.
PAUL SOLMAN: ... that you would
otherwise have had to pay in
taxes.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON:
That's right.
PAUL SOLMAN: You then
invest that money.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: Correct.
And in the future,
you pay taxes.
And I will give you the example
I have used with Donald Trump.
If he really made $65 million a
year for his television show,
which NBC says is absurd,
but let's assume he did.
PAUL SOLMAN: But he says that.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON:
He says that.
And he would have paid about $23
million in federal income tax.
If he's able to wipe that out by
depreciating the various
buildings that he owns, he would
keep the $23 million.
Now, the normal rules
say he has 20 years.
So let's assume he keeps it 20
years, and he earns a net of 10
percent a year.
And, after all, he's Donald
Trump, who says he's a great
investor.
At the end of the 20 years,
Trump would give the government
the $23 million, which is worth
a lot less because of inflation,
and he would pocket, after tax,
$130 million.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's the $23
million at 10 percent a year.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: For all
those years, that's the interest
on it.
And I don't think most Americans
understand that, for certain
very wealthy people, our
federal income tax system is a
subsidy system that makes them
richer.
PAUL SOLMAN: But you can't blame
Mr. Trump for taking advantage
of the system.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: I agree.
I do not blame him one bit.
But that's only part one of it.
The second part is the 1984 tax
trials, when he appealed his New
York state and New York
City audits, were about Donald
claiming zero revenue for his
consulting business and taking
over $600,000 of deductions, for
which he couldn't produce any
documentation, no receipts,
no checks, nothing.
When shown a tax return that
Donald Trump had been audited on
-- he appealed the audits
-- his tax guy said, well,
that's my signature, but I
didn't prepare that.
In fact, it was a photocopy.
No one could find the original.
Now, those two elements, zero
income and huge deductions,
combined with his own tax guy
testifying under oath, that's my
signature, but I didn't prepare
that tax return, those
are very strong badges of fraud.
And seen in the context of Trump
having committed sales tax fraud
in the past, which is
indisputable,
I think that it's reasonable for
the American public to ask, did
you go beyond what's lawful,
maybe scandalously lawful, but
lawful, and violate the law?
PAUL SOLMAN: Sales tax fraud?
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: Well, Donald
participated in something known
as the empty box scam.
He bought $65,000 worth of
jewelry from Bulgari across the
street from Trump Tower, and had
the record show that it was
mailed to him in an out-of-state
address.
Now, if you're not a New York
resident, you may not have to
pay sales tax if the jewelry
is mailed to you
in another state.
The problem is, they
were empty boxes.
It was proven.
PAUL SOLMAN: Was he convicted?
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: No.
Instead, the attorney general of
New York prosecuted the store
manager and one of the
Italian owners of the store.
And that led Mayor Ed Koch to
say, the customers who took part
in this fraud, they should serve
15 days in jail.
They're really the criminals
here, not the store.
PAUL SOLMAN: But he
didn't serve any time.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: No.
And he wasn't charged
in the case either.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, so, then, why
are you making a big deal of it?
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: Lots of
people commit crimes and don't
get arrested.
That's not the measure.
The measure is, did you
engage in unlawful conduct?
Now, Joe Blow does this, we
don't particularly care.
But if you're going to be the
president of the United States,
we're reasonably going
to put you under a microscope.
And Donald Trump's tax behavior
is absolutely important to
understanding, is he qualified,
is he morally fit, is he
capable, is he trustworthy to
have everything from the powers
of federal
law enforcement to
the nuclear codes?
PAUL SOLMAN: Peter Navarro,
economic adviser to Mr. Trump,
economist, University of
California
at Irvine, says, Mr. Trump
should not release his income
taxes, and here's why.
PETER NAVARRO, Trump Economic
Adviser: It gives the opposition
too much information.
Why would you do that?
PAUL SOLMAN: Because every other
presidential candidate ever has.
PETER NAVARRO: Ah, but
here's the difference.
He's self-funding his campaign.
And if you release your tax
returns when you're self-funding
your campaign, you reveal to
the opposition how much you
have to run that campaign.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: I think the
reasonable response to this is,
what are you hiding?
DONALD TRUMP: Almost every
lawyer says, you don't release
your returns until the audit's
complete.
When the audit's
complete, I will do it.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: Let's take
Trump at his word: I can't
release the returns that are
under audit.
Well, let's have your
returns from 1977 to 2008.
The audits are closed on those.
There's no excuse, by your own
standard, not to release those
returns.
PAUL SOLMAN: Why do you
care so much about this?
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON: Because I
want to make sure that the
American public knows who this
man is.
I met Donald Trump in June of
1988, when I went to Atlantic
City to cover the casino
industry.
And so my standard here is,
you should know these facts.
And the minute you know, and you
still want to vote for someone,
you should go ahead and
vote for them.
But don't later
say, I had no idea.
PAUL SOLMAN: David Cay
Johnston, thank you very much.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON:
Thank you, Paul.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The IRS says
nothing prevents Trump from
sharing his tax information even
if he is being audited.
For his part, Trump told Bill
O'Reilly on FOX News Channel
last night that he didn't
admit at the debate that he
doesn't pay federal taxes.
But he also didn't confirm
that he does pay such taxes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Today, the Pew
Research center reported on how
different
racial groups see the police.
Only a third of all
African-Americans view the
police as doing an excellent
job, compared
to roughly three-quarters
of all whites.
Working with the police is one
of the many responsibilities of
Newark, New Jersey, Mayor
Ras Baraka.
For over a year, "NewsHour"
special correspondent Charlayne
Hunter-Gault has explored
solutions
to the nation's racial tensions
and sits down with him for the
latest in our series.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Ras
Baraka's election as mayor of
Newark, New Jersey, sent chills
through the city's
establishment.
RAS BARAKA (D), Mayor of Newark,
New Jersey: We need a mayor that
is radical.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Out of
nowhere, Ras Baraka has won over
most of his critics, and
we sat down with him
to find out how.
But what do you mean by radical?
RAS BARAKA: Well, I mean going
to the root of the problem.
That's what it means to me.
That's what radical is.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But,
somehow -- and I will start with
the white people who doubted
you -- and yet, according to The
New York Times and other
articles I have read, you
have won them over.
What did you do?
RAS BARAKA: We have -- you know,
I, as the mayor, have been able
to lead very well and
bring people together and
negotiate and fight for what we
think we need and compromise
around
the issues that we
can gain ground on.
So, ultimately, I mean, the
chair belongs to the people.
It doesn't belong to me.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, how
do you balance off creating
opportunities and supporting
business with the people who
live in these poverty-stricken
neighborhoods?
RAS BARAKA: These are not poor
cities in terms of it resources.
There's just the wealth is not
staying in the hands of the
people that are here.
And you have to create scenarios
where more wealth is -- remains
behind for the people
in this town.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: In the
two years that you have been
mayor, have you seen substantial
change there?
RAS BARAKA: We have a municipal
I.D. that we didn't have before.
We have 6,000, 7,000 more people
who now can involve themselves
in the city, pull themselves
out of the shadows and
participate in city services,
that can put their money in
specific
banks, that can, you know,
participate in the economy of
this city that could not prior,
when -- if they had a record
or if they were immigrants.
We have begun to attack the
unemployment rate in the city.
It's spiraling downwards, but
there is still a huge way to go.
And we're pushing for a jobs
plan on a state and federal
level.
That's been extremely helpful.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: One of
the things I was interested in
that I read about was
how you support the Black Lives
Matter movement, as well as
police.
How do you reconcile
those two things?
RAS BARAKA: Well, I don't think
they're mutually exclusive.
I think that, you know, safety
in the community,
African-Americans want to be
safe in their
community, like any other
nationality that lives in
America.
They don't want to be robbed.
They don't want to be beat.
They don't want to be shot down
in their neighborhoods, whether
it's by police officers or
people
who live there.
So, to advocate for police in a
community, I don't think is a
contradiction.
I think it's necessary.
But what I think we want is
community policing and police
officers who care about the
community
that they live in, who think
that they're part of a
community, and not an occupying
force in a community.
And I think that is important
for us to create, change the
culture of the police
department,
where they begin to see that
they have to police our
neighborhoods the same way other
people's neighborhoods are
policed in suburban communities
and other areas.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So,
how are you doing that?
RAS BARAKA: We have developed a
civilian complaint review board.
We changed the makeup of
the internal affairs.
We provide training for new
recruits that is not like the
training that they normally
get.
They get sensitivity training.
They get the kind of
de-escalation training.
We begin to sensitize them to
what's happening in their
neighborhoods and the
communities
where they police.
We try to advocate that police
officers live in a community
longer than they normally do.
So, those are things
that have to happen.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And
what result are you seeing?
RAS BARAKA: Well,
we have just begun.
So, we can't, like, give
you empirical data on it.
We have only been in office two
years, not 25, and this problem
has been, like, decades
of work.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But
you're getting feedback from
both sides, are you not?
RAS BARAKA: I think that some of
the concerns about a civilian
complaint review board are
based on knee-jerk reactions
that people have about police
supervision that they have
always
had.
But we live in a new time and a
new place, and people have to
begin to be ready for the
kind of oversight that
the public is demanding.
And I don't see any of that as
contradictory to supporting the
Black Lives Matter movement.
People say all lives matter.
And that's true, but it's just
black people that are getting
shot in the back running
or choked to death for having
cigarettes or playing their
music too loud.
So it's important for us to
uphold all life, but we have to
be honest and say that, you
know, African-Americans are
being disproportionately
affected by, you know, the kind
of misuse
and abuse of power.
And so there needs to be,
obviously, some light shed on
that, which is why Black Lives
Matter is important.
And then there needs to be some
reconciliation and repair of
what's going on.
So, all of the things, from body
cameras to review boards, to
training, to people calling
for independent investigators,
all those things are important
for us to get a handle on what's
happening in our cities.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You have
just described a situation that
exists in many cities across
this nation.
What kind of solutions
would you propose?
And what kinds of things have
you done that you could share
with others to improve these
circumstances?
RAS BARAKA: I think that,
ultimately, the only thing that
affects race relations is
fair treatment.
I mean, the problems that exist
in Newark are national problems.
They're systemic problems that
existed before I was even born.
And they exist all over the
country, which means that we
need a systemic solution for
these problems.
So, we don't know everything.
We're experimenting and trying
to do the best that we can with
the ideas that we have, creating
opportunities for cooperatives,
so we can get people to begin to
own business and own
what they have in their
community to offer.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Cooperatives?
RAS BARAKA: Cooperatives where
we have collective ownership,
workers begin to own the
businesses
that they work in.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Based on
everything I have read, you have
a really good relationship
with business, the business
community, for the most part.
So how do you see getting them
invested in the things that you
have just talked about?
RAS BARAKA: Prudential held a
convention or conference for us
here in Newark about procurement
and convening the folks in a
community, the business
community, to begin to help us
invest
more in this community.
Saint Barnabas has invested in
the capital project of our
cooperative laundry, reentry
laundry, made up mostly of folks
who are 100 percent Newark
residents, predominantly black
and brown folks in the city,
folks who were formally
incarcerated who are now
beginning
to learn how to run and
operate a laundry business.
And they're going to own and
operate a cooperative laundry
that does business with the
local
hospitals in this area.
We haven't hit a home run yet,
but, you know, I think we're up
at the plate and we're swinging.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
Mr. Mayor, thank you for joining
us.
RAS BARAKA: No problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: An acclaimed
deejay has been traveling the
globe documenting the changing
landscape of music
and digital culture.
Jeffrey Brown has another
edition to our Bookshelf looking
at the result of these travels,
the
new volume, "Uproot."
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON,
Author, "Uproot: Travels in
21st-Century Music and Digital
Culture": So, what I will start
off with, scratchy old 45 that I
found in Morocco, just
kind of randomly dropping
the needle on the record.
Let's see.
JEFFREY BROWN: What
does a deejay do?
Well, Jace Clayton, AKA DJ
/rupture, takes musical pieces
from around the world, adds
his own sounds and mixes them
together, creating something
that will make you get up and
dance,
or maybe listen in
a brand-new way.
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON:
Activating music, you know,
keeping music alive.
JEFFREY BROWN: Each part
is alive on its own.
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON: Each
part is alive on its own, but I
love the way in which, when
you bring these things into
overlap or superimposition, they
start talking to each other in
new and
surprising ways.
And you can tell all sorts
of stories with this.
JEFFREY BROWN: The 41-year-old
Clayton graduated from Harvard
with a degree in English, but
music has been his passion
since middle school.
In 2001, he put a mix called
"Gold Teeth Thief" on his Web
site and was stunned when
hundreds
of thousands of people around
the globe started sharing it.
He's traveled the world ever
since, both making music and
collecting it, and tells what
he's
found in a new book, "Uproot:
Travels in 21st-Century Music
and Digital Culture."
These days, New York is home,
and that's where we talked.
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON: All
this disruption through
technology, how all these
digital
changes are transforming how we
think about analog, how we think
about what music used
to be and what it's becoming.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, when you say
travels in 21st century music
and digital culture, what
are you looking for?
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON: I'm
looking for the surprises, you
know, and...
JEFFREY BROWN: The surprises?
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON:
Exactly, the unexpected moments
of technology, the unexpected
moments
of musical creation.
Every time I'm in a foreign
place and a different city, I'm
always asking around to say, OK,
well, what's special here
in this particular place?
What makes these people
move here and why?
And so I'm one of the people who
will hear a song in a taxi and
be like, stop, stop the
car.
Like, let's go back.
What was that?
JEFFREY BROWN: You
mean literally?
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE"
CLAYTON: Literally, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Stop the car.
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE"
CLAYTON: Stop the car.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because you heard
it coming out of some
storefront?
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE"
CLAYTON: Exactly, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: That approach has
taken him to side streets off
the beaten path in more
than three dozen countries,
Morocco, for instance, where he
spent time with local musicians
and
performed with his own group,
Nettle, mixing his electronic
sounds with traditional
instruments
and a singer, and Mexico where,
again, he found that, in the age
of globalization, while
everyone now has access to the
same music, local culture
continues to thrive, and music
is a way to understand it.
Clayton writes of the young
people he encountered making
North Mexican teen rave music.
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON:
They're saying, oh, we hear all
this sort of international
techno is really popular here.
But then they grew up in this
world of hearing rodeo music,
sort of cowboy music from their
parents.
Then they go on YouTube and
they're seeing Shakira videos.
And so they're thinking, so,
like, what is local to us right
now?
And so the idea that local now
draws on all sorts of
international, all sorts of
layers
of input, and yet they're still
making something which would
only be made in Monterrey,
Mexico,
in this moment.
This is urgent music.
We need to discuss it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Is there a
general theory why, in Benin,
there's this, and, in Morocco,
there's
that, and in North
Mexico, there is this?
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON:
Well, that is why is so
exciting.
It's like there is
no general theory.
And so, if there's anything I
have learned, it's to sort of be
sensitive to what -- to
how much -- to how creative the
act of listening is and to how
powerful the act of listening
is.
JEFFREY BROWN: He makes his
living playing at clubs and at
major festivals like here
at Pitchfork in Chicago.
In a world in which music
travels as never before, when a
young producer can bypass big
record labels, and so much music
is consumed for free, I asked
Clayton how he sees his
role.
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON: I do
think of myself as a
taste-maker, yes, absolutely.
And so much of what deejays like
myself do is, I'm very
interested in -- I'm constantly
looking for new music,
constantly digging, but then
also I am thinking about how to
present
it in a way that kind of makes
sense to people who are less --
sort of less with their hands
in it than I am.
JEFFREY BROWN: I wonder if you
run into people, if you say,
what about just the human voice?
You know, what about just
somebody playing a guitar?
I love watching -- going to a
cafe, and I just -- somebody
plays a guitar, and that's
beautiful.
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON:
You know, I say, me, too.
(LAUGHTER)
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE" CLAYTON: Most
of the summer here in New York
City, I have just been going
to hear coral music in churches,
completely unamplified, the
human voice, maybe an organ.
JEFFREY BROWN: The guy who is
writing about digital technology
and musical culture just
goes to church and
listens to a chorus?
JACE "DJ /RUPTURE"
CLAYTON: I know.
Yes, I have got to look at the
flip side of things, because, in
a way, music is always
a conversation, you know?
It's a conversation between the
musician and their tools and
their technologies.
It's a conversation between
people and their community, you
know, people and -- and
deejaying,
it is a way of amplifying that
conversation and kind of putting
that conversation on blast
in a way.
But at a very basic level, it's
records talking to records.
JEFFREY BROWN: From New York
City, I'm Jeffrey Brown for the
"PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to another
in our Brief But Spectacular
series, where ask interesting
people to describe
their passions.
Tonight, we hear from artist iO
Tillett Wright, whose
photography projects have
sparked a
dialogue on gender
identification and sexuality.
iO's memoir, "Darling Days," was
released this week by Ecco.
IO TILLETT WRIGHT, Author,
"Darling Days": My earliest
memory of wanting to be a boy
was when I was -- had my fifth
birthday party, and I had this
lacy blue dress.
The second I got home, I was
just like, get this thing off of
me.
And I ripped it off.
And I, like, put on warrior
paint and I went up to the roof,
and I, like, took a piss
standing
up.
That was my, like,
ownership of it.
These kids were like, are
you a boy or a girl?
And I was like, why
does that matter?
I can play better than you.
And they didn't let me play.
And I went to my dad and I was
like, hey, I'm a boy now.
And he was like, OK.
My mom's attitude was, yes, as
long as you can get acting roles
as a boy, I don't care.
My mom put me into child acting.
I only played boys
until I was 17.
And then I played
a couple girls.
And that's was when people
started to tell me that I was
too unique.
And it was like, if one more
person tells me I'm too unique,
out of here.
And I did.
I quit.
I miss acting.
But do you cast me as a boy?
Do you cast me as a girl?
Do you cast me as the gay girl?
Do you cast me as the trans kid?
Oh.
QUESTION: You have got
incredible range.
IO TILLETT WRIGHT: I have
got incredible range.
For the last six years, I have
done this project where I have
been photographing 10,000 people
who identify as anywhere on the
LGBT spectrum in all 50 states.
And if you look into the eyes of
a person that you discriminate
against or you think
is so different than you that
they deserve less rights than
you, it becomes almost
impossible
to deny their humanity.
The complicated part of that is,
I'm not trying to say we are all
the same.
What I'm trying to say is, we
are all completely different,
and that's the beauty of it.
I had set out to photograph
gay people and trans people.
And what I had found was that
people from older generations
identified super strongly
with labels because they'd
had to fight for them.
But younger people were more
like, well, yes, like I loved a
guy, and now I love a girl,
and maybe I'm more
boyish tomorrow.
They're more fluid on
a spectrum of things.
I think that the most dignified
gift you can give them as a
human, as part of their family
or their family of friends,
is the right to change.
I'm iO Tillett Wright.
And this is my Brief But
Spectacular take on expanding
one's circle of normalcy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can watch
additional Brief But Spectacular
episodes at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.